# SnuPL/2 Compiler



## Logistics

### Teamwork
Starting with this second phase of our term project, we work in teams. The TAs will facilitate the group building.

Each group will designate a group leader. The group leaders have no special duties except that they maintain the repository of their group and have to invite the other group members to collaborate on their (private) project.


### Hand-out

This repository contains all files up to phase 2. This means that you need to update your fork to reflect those changes. In Git speak, this can be achieved by *rebasing* your fork.

Before we begin: 
* Your repository (the fork of the handout) is called *origin*. The forked handout is called *upstream*.
* Commit all your local changes first; rebase will fail if you have unstaged (uncommited) changes.

1. Add the handout as an *upstream remote*  
   ```bash
   snuplc $ git remote add upstream https://teaching.csap.snu.ac.kr/compilers/spring-2022.git
   ```
2. Download the `main` branch from *upstream*  
   ```bash
   snuplc $ git fetch upstream main
   ```
3. Rebase (overwrite) your `main` branch with that from *upstream*  
   ```bash
   snuplc $ git rebase upstream/main
   ```
4. Push back the changes to *origin*  
   ```bash
   snuplc $ git push origin main --force
   ```
   You may have to unprotect your branch if you get a `error: failed to push some refs to...`. In the Gitlab UI, go to Settings -> Repository -> Protected branches and delete the protection on `main`.
5. Make sure your repository is in a sane state  
   ```bash
   snuplc $ git pull
   ```

Note: in our tests, we had lots and lots of problems with these operations. If all else fails, clone the handout into a new directory and merge the changes manually into your repository.


### Submission

Tag your submission with "Submission Phase 2". A brief howto on tagging was provided in [Phase 1](1.Lexical.Analysis.md).



## Phase 2: Syntax Analysis

In the second phase of our term project, we implement a handwritten predictive parser for the SnuPL/2 language.

### Description

The output of the parser is an abstract syntax tree (AST) in textual and graphical form. 
No semantical checks (type checking, number of parameter checking, etc.) are required in this phase with one exception: symbols must be defined before use. 
In addition, constraints that cannot be expressed with a context-free grammar but are part of the syntax must be checked.
These include, for example, that the declaration and end identifiers of module and subroutines must match.

A skeleton of the parser is provided, so that you can focus on the interesting parts. 
The working example, as before, implements a parser for the SnuPL/-1 language as defined in the scanner assignment. 
You may use your own scanner from phase 1, or use our scanner binary for SnuPL/2 provided in the directory `snuplc/reference/scanner/`.

The parser skeleton can be found in `snupl/src/parser.[h/cpp]`. 
The parser already outputs an AST and contains a type manager and a nested symbol table. 
We recommend to use the existing code, but of course you can write your own class hierarchy. 
In its original form, the parser parses and builds an AST for SnuPL/-1.

In the parser, you will have to modify/code the methods of the predictive parser. 
For SnuPL/-1, the following methods are implemented:
```C
/// @name methods for recursive-descent parsing
/// @{
CAstModule*      module(void);

CAstStatement*   statSequence(CAstScope *s);

CAstStatAssign*  assignment(CAstScope *s);

CAstExpression*  expression(CAstScope *s);
CAstExpression*  simpleexpr(CAstScope *s);
CAstExpression*  term(CAstScope *s);
CAstExpression*  factor(CAstScope *s);
CAstConstant*    number(void);
/// @}
```

The call sequence of the method represents a parse tree. 
The AST is constructed from the return values of the methods called during the parse. 
The AST is implemented in `snuplc/src/ast.[h/cpp]`.

### Your Task
In a first step, you may want to simply build a predictive parser that only consumes the tokens but does not build the AST. 
Once your parser is working correctly, you can then start to return the correct AST nodes in a second step.

The type manager, implemented in `snuplc/src/type.[h/cpp]`, should not be modified. 
You can use it to retrieve types for integer, character, and boolean variables, plus the composite types pointer and array. 
Call `CTypeManager::Get()→GetInt()/GetChar()/GetBool()/GetPointer()/GetArray()` to retrieve a reference to integer, character, boolean, pointer or array types.

The symbol table is implemented in `snuplc/src/symbol.[h/cpp]`. 
Again, you should not modify this file, the provided functionality is sufficient for this phase of the project. 
Since symbol tables are nested, you must create a new nested symbol table whenever you parse a function/procedure and
insert the symbols into the symbol table of the current scope.

A test program that prints the AST is provided. Build and run it as follows:
```bash
snuplc $ make test_parser
snuplc $ ./test_parser ../test/parser/test01.mod
```

In the directory `test/parser/` you can find a number of files to test your parser. 
We advise you to create your own test cases to examine special cases; we have our own set of test files to test (and
grade) your parser.


### Inline Documentation
Our SnuPL/2 compiler and the skeleton code are fully documented with Doxygen.
You can generate the documentation from your sources by running 
```bash
snuplc $ make doc
```
from the `snuplc` directory. You will need to install Doxygen and Graphviz (dot) on your machine.



### Materials to submit:
* Source code  
  Document your code properly - including Doxygen comments for all new classes, member functions, and fields.
  Please do not include any generated files (documentation, relocateable object files, binaries) into your GitLab repository. We will compile your code by ourselves.

* A brief report describing your implementation of the parser in PDF format  
  The report must be stored as `reports/2.Syntax.Analysis.pdf`.  
  You can use the reports from the individual phases to compiler your final report at the end of this semester.
  Note that the reports are almost as important as your code. Make sure to put sufficient effort into them!


## Final words
Implementing a compiler is difficult. Do noot hesitate to ask questions in class and on Slack. 
Also, start as soon as possible; if you wait until a few days before the deadline we cannot help you much and you may not be able to finish in time.

Happy coding!
